---
title: "Research"
---
I am broadly interested in N-body simulations and dynamics of galactic systems.  So far I have studied systems on only parsec scales but I am eager to extend my study to larger scale and more complex systems in the future.

## Eccentric Nuclear Disks and Mergers
Galactic Nuclei provide an interesting laboratory for dynamicists. The nucleus of our nearest, large galactic neighbor, M31, contains an eccentric nuclear disk--a disk of stars on apsidally aligned eccentric orbits around a supermassive black hole (SMBH).  Evidence points to these systems being quite common in the local universe, so understanding their dynamical properties is useful.  Previous studies of eccentric nuclear disks considered only an isolated disk, and did not study their dynamics in galaxy mergers (particularly a perturbing SMBH).  Since these eccentric disks often form in gas-rich galaxy mergers, we conducted the first study of the direct effects of a galaxy merger on an eccentric disk. 

We simulate disks in galaxy mergers with N-body simulations using the Python module REBOUND, whose documentation is available freely online.  Since these modeling this systems can be computationally expensive, we made use of CU's supercomputing resources to run these simulations. To simulate the disk we created a stellar population with 100 equal mass stars around a central SMBH with a fixed secondary SMBH on a circular orbit (generally outside of the disk), and integrated over 500 orbits.  Beyond 500 orbits, unrealistically strong two-body relaxation made simulations unreliable. We varied the initial conditions of the SMBH over a range of semi-major axes, masses, and inclinations to find those which have the most interesting dynamical consequences for the disk. One of the properties we studied were tidal disruption events (TDEs): a phenomena that occurs when an orbiting star in a galactic nucleus passes too close to the SMBH and is torn apart, then accreting onto the SMBH.  Eccentric disks can have much higher TDE rates than isotropic star clusters, and we were interested in seeing how a secondary SMBH affected TDE rates.  Overall the dynamical properties we investigate are disk alignment, TDE rates, and how the eccentricity of the disk orbits is affected by the new secondary SMBH.

We found a range of interesting dynamical effects that occur under the right conditions. Mainly, we found that massive distant secondary SMBHs could align eccentric disk ~ 4 times more than they would be in their isolation, as well as suppression of TDE rates that would also occur in the disk’s isolation, and dynamically interesting changes in the eccentricity of disk orbits. Mainly: a negative eccentricity gradient must be present in the eccentric disk for it to stably precess, and we found with the additional secondary SMBH that a nearly uniform eccentricity profile could be stable configuration.

 These effects are strongest for systems where the secondary is approximately ten times the inner disk edge. This is comparable to the radius where an SMBH binary inspiral might stall for a 0.4 pc scale disk (somewhat smaller than M31's disk). For a much more in depth analysis of these processes, see our paper here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ex8OZWwoMHu-4aj-DJAEQmhYBWhmLSg8/view?usp=sharing.

## The Restricted 3-body Problem
Within the disk-Merger system, the disk particle can be treated as massless in compararision to a massive perturbing SMBH around the primary SMBH.  This motivates the restricted 3-body problem.  In my attempts at analytic solution at deriving the precession rate of a test particle, I approached the problem with the unusal complications of a a massive non-planar 3rd body.  Most solutions assumed the potential is keplerian, but since the body was massive enough for this approximation to fail I used a spherical harmonic expansion of the potential up to octuopole order. Interestingly, retrograde perturbers are better described by the analytic formalism than prograde perturbers. This is because non-secular kicks are stronger are in the prograde case. (The relative velocity between the pertuber and the test star at their closest separation is smaller for prograde perturbers than for retrograde perturbers.) In summary, we concluded that in the case of the restricted 3-body problem with a massive perturbing 3rd body, retrograde perturbers are better described by the analytic formalism than prograde perturbers due to non-secular effects.  This could be potentially useful in systems extending beyong galactic nuclei, like planetary systems, Saturn's rings, etc.

